📄 Sophia Genetics Case Study (#532)
kestra-io/docs: content/blogs/2023-09-25-genomic-data-workflow-sophia-genetics-kestra.md

---
title: "Orchestrating Genomic Data Workflows: Sophia Genetics Optimizes Operations with Kestra"
description: "How a leading company in the pharmaceutical industry use Kestra to orchestrate genomic data workflows ?"
date: 2023-09-25T09:00:00
category: Solutions
author:
  name: Benoit Pimpaud
  image: "bpimpaud"
image: /blogs/2023-09-25-genomic-data-workflow-sophia-genetics-kestra.jpg
---

> Genomic sequence analysis is a key process for leading companies in the pharmaceutical industry. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Genomic sequence analysis is a key process for leading companies in the pharmaceutical industry. Yet, bioinformaticians have long grappled with existing tools that either lack user-friendly interfaces or fail to integrate smoothly with external systems. Enter Kestra, a game-changing solution designed to fill this gap. While many tools in the field either skew too scientific, neglect modern integration capabilities, or rely on the limitations of interpreted languages like Python, [Kestra](https://github.com/kestra-io/kestra) offers a balanced approach. It combines scientific rigor with the flexibility to integrate with contemporary tooling, making it easier to scale, update architecture, and onboard new talent into this specialized field. In essence, Kestra addresses the bioinformatics community's pressing need for a tool that harmonizes scientific depth with modern technological agility.
```

> Still bioinformaticians struggled to create a workflow that smoothly connects with external systems, has a user-friendly interface, and is easy for non-experts to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Quite surprisingly, none of the existing tools in this space appeared to adequately address the aforementioned pain point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Quite surprisingly, none of the existing tools in this space appeared to adequately address the aforementioned pain point.
```

> Why is that?

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> These tools either focus too heavily on scientific aspects, lacking the flexibility to accommodate side-business use cases and integrate with modern tools. Alternatively, researchers rely on Python packages and encounter the limitations associated with an interpreted language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> These limitations make it harder to scale, update the architecture, and bring in people who are new to this specialized field. The bioinformaticians' collective experiences shed light on the need for innovative solutions that strike a balance between scientific rigor and compatibility with modern tooling, overcoming the limitations imposed by language choices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

    
* Trimming and filtering: remove adapter sequences, low-quality bases, or other artifacts.

**2. Sequence Alignment**: 
    
* Reference selection: to choose an appropriate reference genome or transcriptome.
    
* Alignment: to align the preprocessed reads to the selected reference.

**3. Variant Calling**: 
    
* Variant calling algorithms: to identify single nucleotide variants, insertions, deletions, or structural variants.
    
* Variant quality filtering: to select high-quality variants for downstream analysis.

**4. Annotation and Functional Analysis**: 
    
* Annotation databases: to annotate variants with information regarding their genomic location, functional impact, and known associations.
    
* Functional analysis: to perform functional analysis, including pathway enrichment, protein domain analysis, or prediction of variant effects on protein structure and function.

**5. Visualization and Interpretation**: 
    
* Data visualization: to generate plots, graphs, and interactive visualizations for exploration and interpretation. 
    
* Integrating other data types: to gain deeper insights into the biological context.

> The complexity of genomic sequence analysis is apparent, isn’t it? In general this process necessitates the use of over 12 tools tailored to each step's requirements. Imagine how overwhelming this could be if relying on manual execution… Data engineering plays a crucial role in implementing these transformations efficiently and at scale. It involves designing data pipelines, selecting appropriate algorithms and tools, optimizing performance, and ensuring data integrity and reliability throughout the process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The complexity of genomic sequence analysis is apparent. This process necessitates the use of over 12 tools tailored to each step's requirements. Imagine how overwhelming this could be if relying on manual execution… Data engineering plays a crucial role in implementing these transformations efficiently and at scale. It involves designing data pipelines, selecting appropriate algorithms and tools, optimizing performance, and ensuring data integrity and reliability throughout the process.
```

> This is precisely where Kestra stands out. It empowers you to effortlessly manage hundreds of diverse, both small and large panel workflows on a daily basis, all within a cost-effective production environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is where Kestra stands out. It empowers bio-informaticians to manage a large panel of workflows from all sizes on a daily basis, all within a cost-effective production environment.
```

## Kestra: The Solution for Sophia Genetics

We're proud to be aiding one of the industry's leading giants, [Sophia Genetics](https://www.sophiagenetics.com/), in helping their bioinformaticians orchestrate and automate critical operations like Demultiplexing Sequencing Data

### Data Chunking: A Compute Challenge

Bioinformaticians employ a 'divide-and-conquer' strategy, often referred to as Split/Merge in data processing. This involves breaking down the dataset into manageable chunks, applying the same processing to each.

> However, the true challenge arises from the unpredictability of the number of splits needed before execution. This variability can stem from factors like dataset size, complexity, and the specific algorithms being used. To ensure efficient execution, it becomes paramount to provision a dedicated compute node for each split. This targeted allocation of computing resources substantially reduces processing time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the true challenge arises from the unpredictability of the number of splits needed before execution. This variability can stem from factors like dataset size, complexity, and the specific algorithms being used. To ensure efficient execution, it becomes essential to provision a dedicated compute node for each split. This targeted allocation of computing resources reduces processing time.
```

> Without this strategic allocation, one might find themselves waiting for an extended period, potentially up to 10 hours, just to process a 100GB file. This emphasizes the critical role of resource management in the seamless execution of bioinformatics workflows.

Reviewer: Lack of proper resource allocation can lead to wait times of up to 10 hours for processing a 100GB file, highlighting the critical role of efficient resource management in bioinformatics workflows.

> Without this strategic allocation, one might find themselves waiting for an extended period, potentially up to 10 hours, just to process a 100GB file. This emphasizes the critical role of resource management in the seamless execution of bioinformatics workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lack of proper resource allocation can lead to wait times of up to 10 hours for processing a 100GB file, highlighting the critical role of efficient resource management in bioinformatics workflows.
```
